The Standards for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Patientswith  COPD  document  2004  updates  the  position  papers  onchronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) published bythe  American  Thoracic  Society  (ATS)  and  the  EuropeanRespiratory  Society  (ERS)  in  1995  [1,  2].  Both  societies  feltthe   need   to   update   the   previous   documents   due   to   thefollowing.   1)   The   prevalence   and   overall   importance   of COPD  as  a  health  problem  is  increasing.  2)  There  have been  enough  advances  in  the  field  to  require  an  update, especially  adapted  to  the  particular  needs  of  the  ATS/ERS constituency. 3) It allows for the creation of a "live" modular document  based  on  the  web;  it  should  provide  healthcare professionals  and  patients  with  a  user  friendly  and  reliable authoritative  source  of  information.  4)  The  care  of  COPD should   be   comprehensive,   is   often   multidisciplinary   and rapidly changing. 5) Both the ATS and the ERS acknowledge the recent dissemination of the Global Initiative of Obstructive   Lung   Disease   (GOLD)   [3]   as   a   major   worldwide contribution  to  the  battle  against  COPD.  However,  some specific requirements of the members of both societies require adaptation of the broad GOLD initiative. Those requirements include specific recommendations on oxygen therapy, pulmonary  rehabilitation,  noninvasive  ventilation,  surgery  in  and for  COPD,  sleep,  air  travel,  and  end-of-life.  In  addition, special emphasis has been placed on issues related to the habit of smoking and its control.
The  main  goals  of  the  updated  document  are  to  improve the  quality  of  care  provided  to  patients  with  COPD  and  to develop  the  project  using  a  disease-oriented  approach.  To achieve  these  goals,  both  organisations  have  developed  a modular  electronic  web-based  document  with  two  components.  1)  A  component  for  health  professionals  that  intends to: raise awareness of COPD; inform on the latest advances in the overall pathogenesis, diagnosis, monitoring and management  of  COPD;  and  promote  the  concept  that  COPD  is  a treatable disease. 2) A component for the patient that intends to: provide practical information on all aspects of COPD; and promote  a  healthy  lifestyle  to  all  patients  afflicted  with  the disease.
The committee members who were involved in the production of this document are clinicians, nurses, respiratory therapists and educators interested in the field of COPD. The current Standards for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Patients with COPD  document  is  unique  in  that  it  also  had  input  from patients suffering from COPD. The committee members were proposed and approved by the ATS and ERS. The members were  selected  because  of  their  expertise  and  willingness  to participate  in  the  generation  of  the  document.  A  unique feature  of  this  project  was  the  development  of  a  patient document that could serve as a formal source of information for the patients, thereby making them partners in the effort to decrease the burden of the disease.
Several well-accepted guidelines served as the blueprint for the  document.  Namely,  the  ATS  and  the  ERS  standards  of 1995 [1, 2] and the GOLD initiative published in 2001 [3]. At the   initial   meeting,   each   member   of   the   committee   was assigned a specific section of the document and was asked to select  a  subcommittee  to  gather  literature  and  review  the existing evidence. The document was discussed in four group meetings,  and  the  content  and  validity  of  each  section  was thoroughly  reviewed.  The  final  statement  is  the  product  of those discussions and has been approved by all the members of  the  committee.  Several  of  the  basic  source  documents reviewed  have  used  an  evidence-based  approach,  and  the committee  utilised  those  references  as  a  source  of  evidence wherever appropriate. The  draft  document  was  reviewed  by  a  diverse  group  of experts  whose  input  was  also  considered.  Peer  review  was identified by the ATS and ERS, and the final document was submitted for review and approval by the Board of Directorsof the ATS and the Executive Committee of the ERS.
Understanding that medicine and, in particular, the area of COPD  is  constantly  undergoing  changes,  the  ATS  and  the ERS considered that it was time to develop new instruments capable of adjusting to the changes. As such, this is the first statement  conceived  to  be  primarily  based  on  the  web  and capable of being changed as needed. To achieve this goal, the organisations  have  developed a  COPD  task  force composed of three members from each society whose office will last for 3 yrs. The main task of the members is to constantly review advances in the field of COPD and to propose changes to the modules of the document. As is customary in both organisations,  the  need  to  do  so  may  arise  from  the  membership through the current existing mechanisms. One of the members of the task force from each society will represent the society on  the  executive  GOLD  committee.  The  overall  goal  is  to attempt to maintain a synchronous flow with the wider objectives of GOLD.
The  document  has  two  distinct  components.  The  first, directed  at  patients  and  their  needs,  which  can  be  accessed from the ATS/ERS website (www.copd-ats-ers.org) and from the website of each society (www.ersnet.org and www.thoracic.org),  is  not  the  subject  of  this  summary.  The  second  is directed at healthcare practitioners and all those interested in the   professional   issues   related   to   COPD.   This   summary highlights  the  contents  of  the  document  for  health  practitioners,   but   the   readers   are   encouraged   to   access   the document via the  website,  where  an  easy  navigational  tool will  allow  you  to  explore  its  contents.  The  reader  is  also encouraged   to   access   the   patient   document   in   order   to familiarise  themselves  with  its  content.  It  was  designed  for and  with  patients  so  as  to  serve  as  a  reliable  resource  for everyone.
Chronic   obstructive   pulmonary   disease   (COPD)   is   apreventable   and   treatable   disease   state   characterised   by airflow  limitation  that  is  not  fully  reversible.  The  airflow limitation  is  usually  progressive  and  is  associated  with  an abnormal  inflammatory  response  of  the  lungs  to  noxiousparticles  or  gases,  primarily  caused  by  cigarette  smoking. Although COPD affects the lungs, it also produces significant systemic consequences.
The   diagnosis   of   COPD   should   be   considered   in   any patient  who  has  the  following:  symptoms  of  cough;  sputum production;  or dyspnoea; or history of exposure  to risk factors for the disease. The  diagnosis  requires  spirometry;  a  post-bronchodilator forced  expiratory  volume  in  one  second  (FEV1)/forced  vital capacity   (FVC)f0.7   confirms   the   presence   of   airflow limitation  that  is  not  fully  reversible  (table 1).  Spirometry should be obtained in all persons with the following history: exposure to cigarettes; and/or environmental or occupational pollutants;  and/or  presence  of  cough,  sputum  production  or dyspnoea.   Spirometric   classification   has  proved   useful   in predicting health status [4], utilisation of healthcare resources[5],  development  of  exacerbations  [6,  7]  and  mortality  [8]  in COPD. It is intended to be applicable to populations [9] and not  to  substitute  clinical  judgment  in  the  evaluation  of  the severity of disease in individual patients. It  is  accepted  that  a  single  measurement  of  FEV1 incompletely represents the complex clinical consequences of COPD. A  staging  system  that  could  offer  a  composite  picture  of disease  severity  is  highly  desirable,  although  it  is  currently unavailable.  However,  spirometric  classification  is  useful  in predicting outcomes such as health status and mortality, and should be evaluated. In addition to the FEV1, the body massindex (BMI) [10, 11] and dyspnoea [12] have proved useful in predicting outcomes  such  as  survival,  and  this  document recommends that they be evaluated in all patients. BMI  is  easily  obtained  by  dividing  weight  (in  kg)  overheight  (in  m2).  Values v21 kg?m-2 are  associated with  increased mortality. Functional   dyspnoea   can   be   assessed   by   the   Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale as follows. 0: not troubled with breathlessness except with strenuous exercise. 1: troubled by shortness of breath when hurrying or walking up a slight hill.  2:  walks  slower  than  people  of  the  same  age  due  to breathlessness or has to stop for breath when walking at own pace  on  the  level.  3:  stops  for  breath  after  walking  about 100 m or after a few minutes on the level. 4: too breathless to leave the house or breathless when dressing or undressing. Poorly reversible airflow limitation associated with bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis and fibrosis due to tuberculosis are not included in the definition of COPD, and should be considered in its differential diagnosis. Patients  presenting  with  airflow  limitation  at  a  relatively early  age  (4th  or  5th  decade)  and  particularly  those  with  a family  history  of  COPD  should  be  tested  for a1-antitrypsin deficiency.
COPD is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality world-wide,  and  results  in  an  economic  and  social  burden  that  is both substantial and increasing. The prevalence and morbidity  data  greatly  underestimate  the  total  burden  of  COPD because   the   disease   is   usually   not   diagnosed   until   it   is clinically   apparent   and   moderately   advanced.  In   people aged  25–75 yrs  in  the  USA,  the  estimated  prevalence  of mild COPD (defined as FEV1/FVC 70% and FEV1 80% predicted)  was  6.9%  and  of  moderate  COPD  (defined  as FEV1/FVC 70% and FEV1 80% pred) was 6.6%, accordingt o   National   Health   and   Nutrition   Examination   Survey (NHANES).  COPD  is  the  fourth-leading  cause  of  death  in the  USA  and  Europe,  and  COPD  mortality  in  females  has more than doubled over the last 20 yrs [13]. Currently, COPD is  a  more  costly  disease  than  asthma  and,  depending  on country, 50–75% of the costs are for services associated withe xacerbations.  Tobacco  smoke  is  by  far  the  most  important risk factor for COPD worldwide. Other important risk factors are occupational exposures, socio-economic status and genetic predisposition. COPD has a variable natural history and not all individuals follow  the  same  course  [14].  The  often-quoted  statistic  that only 15–20% of smokers develop clinically significant COPD may underestimate the toll of COPD. It  is  increasingly  apparent  that  COPD  often  has  its  roots decades before the onset of symptoms [15]. Impaired growth of lung function during childhood and adolescence, caused by recurrent  infections  or  tobacco  smoking,  may  lead  to  lower maximally attained lung function in early adulthood [16, 17]. This abnormal growth will, often combined with a shortened plateau phase in teenage smokers, increase the risk of COPD. The risk factors for COPD are shown in table 2 and they are separated into host factors and exposures.
COPD  comprises  pathological  changes  in  four  different compartments  of  the  lungs  (central  airways,  peripheral  air-ways,  lung  parenchyma  and  pulmonary  vasculature),  which are variably present in individuals with the disease [18–22]. Tobacco   smoking   is   the   main   risk   factor   for   COPD, although other inhaled noxious particles and gases may contribute.  This  causes  an  inflammatory  response  in  the  lungs, which  is  exaggerated  in  some  smokers,  and  leads  to  the characteristic  pathological  lesions  of  COPD.  In  addition  to inflammation,  an  imbalance  of  proteinases  and  antiproteinases in the lungs, and oxidative stress are also important in the  pathogenesis  of  COPD  [23].  The  different  pathogenic mechanisms produce the pathological changes which, in turn,give   rise   to   the   following   physiological   abnormalities   in COPD:   mucous   hypersecretion   and   cilliary   dysfunction; airflow limitation and hyperinflation; gas exchange abnormalities; pulmonary hypertension; and systemic effects [24, 25].
COPD runs an insidious course, measured over years, with an   often   undiagnosed   initial   phase.   Its   presence   can   be suspected  after  a  directed  clinical  evaluation  and  then  confirmed  physiologically  with  simple  spirometry.  Chest  radiography helps in differential diagnosis (table 3), and other tests may be useful to better determine the phenotype and physiological characteristics of individual patients. Some  patients  with  asthma  cannot  be  distinguished  from COPD with the current diagnostic tests. The management of these patients should be similar to that of asthma. 
A  directed  medical  history  should  assess  the  following issues: symptoms of cough, sputum production and dyspnoea; past medical history of asthma, allergies and other respiratory diseases; family history of COPD or other respiratory diseases; co-morbidities; any unexplained weight loss; and exposure history, smoking, and occupational and environmental exposures.
A normal physical examination is common in early COPD[13].  As  the  disease progresses,  some  signs become apparentand  in  advanced  stages  many  are  almost  pathognomonic. Examination should aim at eliciting the presence of respiratory and systemic effects of COPD. All patients should have their respiratory rate, weight and height, and BMI measured.
Cigarette smoking is an addiction and a chronic relapsing disorder,   and   is   regarded   as   a   primary   disorder   by   the Department of Health and Human Services Guidelines in the USA [26, 27] and by the World Health Organization (WHO). Therefore,  treating  tobacco  use  and  dependence  should  be regarded  as  a  primary  and  specific  intervention.  Smoking should be routinely evaluated whenever a patient presents to a healthcare facility and all smokers should be offered the best chance to treat this disorder. The  most  comprehensive  of  the  guidelines  prepared  on smoking  cessation  is "Treating  Tobacco  Use  and  Dependence",  an  evidence-based  guideline  sponsored  by  the  US Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  and  released  in 2000,  which  updates  the  previous  evidence-based  guideline "Smoking Cessation" released in 1996. The guideline and the meta-analyses  on  which  it  is  based  are  available  online  [28]. The key findings of this report are summarised in table 4.
Brief intervention
The  key  steps  in  brief  intervention  are  as  follows.  Ask: systematically,   identify   all   tobacco   users   at   every   visit, implement  an  office-wide  system  that  ensures  that  tobacco use is queried and documented for every patient at every clinic visit. Advise: strongly urge all tobacco users to quit, in a clear, strong   and   personalised   manner.   Assess:   determine   willingness to make a quit attempt. Assist: help the patient with a quit plan, provide practical counselling, provide treatment and  social  support,  help  the  patient  obtain  extra  treatment and social support, recommend the use of approved pharmacotherapy   (except   in   special   circumstances),   and   provide supplementary materials. Arrange: schedule follow-up contact, either in person or via the telephone. Permanent  remissions  can  be  achieved  in  a  substantial percentage  of  smokers  with  currently  available  treatments. Successful  treatment  of  this  disorder  can  have  a  substantial benefit  in  reducing  many  secondary  complications  of  which COPD is one. All patients willing to make a serious attempt to  quit  should  be  offered  pharmacological  support  (nicotine replacement  therapy  and/or  bupropion)  [26,  27].  Smoking cessation activities and support for its implementation should be integrated into the healthcare system.
Effective medications for COPD are available  and  all patients who are symptomatic merit a trial of drug treatment [1–3]. The medications for COPD currently available can reduce or abolish symptoms, increase exercise capacity, reduce the number and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status. At present, no treatment has modified the rate of decline in lung function. The inhaled route is preferred.
The change in lung function after brief treatment with any drug does not help in predicting other clinically related outcomes. Changes in FEV1 following bronchodilator therapy can be small but are often accompanied by larger changes in lung volumes, which contribute to a reduction in perceived breathlessness. Combining different agents produces a greater change in spirometry and symptoms than single agents alone.
Three types of bronchodilator are in common clinical use: b-agonists, anticholinergic drugs and methylxanthines. Despite substantial differences in their site of action within the cell and some evidence for nonbronchodilator activity with some classes of drug, the most important consequence of broncho- dilator therapy appears to be airway smooth muscle relaxa- tion and improved lung emptying during tidal breathing. The resultant increase in FEV1 may be relatively small but is often accompanied by larger changes in lung volumes [29], with a reduction in residual volume and/or a delay of the onset of dynamic hyperinflation during exercise. Both of these changes contribute to a reduction in perceived breathlessness [30, 31]. In general, the more advanced the COPD, the more important the changes in lung volume become relative to those in FEV1. The clinical use of bronchodilator drugs is illustrated in figure 1.
Short-acting bronchodilators can increase exercise tolerance acutely [30, 31]. Long-acting inhaled b-agonists improve health status possibly to a greater extent than regular short- acting anticholinergics [32], reduce symptoms, rescue medication use and increase time between exacerbations compared with placebo [33–35]. Combining short-acting bronchodilator agents (salbutamol (albuterol)/ipratropium) produces  a greater change in spirometry than either agent alone [34]. Combining long-acting b-agonists and ipratropium leads to fewer exacerbations than either drug alone. No good comparative data between different long-acting b-agonists are presently available, although it is likely that their effects will be similar. Combining long-acting b-agonists  and  theophylline appears to produce a greater spirometric change than either drug alone [35]. Tiotropium improves health status and reduces exacerbations and hospitalisations compared with both placebo and regular ipratropium [36, 37].
Theophylline is a weak bronchodilator, which may have some anti-inflammatory properties. Its narrow therapeutic index and complex pharmacokinetics make its  use  difficult, but modern slow-release preparations have improved this problem and lead to more stable plasma levels. Generally, therapeutic levels should be measured and patients should be kept on the lowest effective dose (recommended serum level 8–14 mg?dL-1).
Glucocorticoids act at multiple points within the inflammatory cascade, although their effects in COPD are more modest as compared with bronchial asthma. Data from large patient studies suggest that inhaled corticosteroids can pro- duce a small increase in postbronchodilator FEV1 and a small reduction in bronchial reactivity in stable COPD [38-0]. In patients with more advanced disease (usually classified as an FEV1 v50% pred) there is evidence that the number of exacerbations per year and the rate of deterioration in health status can be reduced by inhaled corticosteroids in COPD [38]. Evidence from four large prospective 3-yr studies has shown no effect of inhaled corticosteroids on rate of change of FEV1 in any severity of COPD [38–41].
When therapy is thought to be ineffective, a trial of with- drawing treatment is reasonable. Some patients will exacerbate when this occurs, which is a reason for re-instituting this therapy [42]. The results of forthcoming large randomised trials with mortality as an outcome will help clarify the role of inhaled glucocorticoids in COPD.
Table 5 summarises the effects of frequently used medications in patients with COPD. The evidence level was obtained from the GOLD document [3] using the same grade of evidence, as follows. Grade A: randomised clinical trial (RCT), rich body of data. Grade B: RCT, limited body of data. Grade C: nonrandomised trials, observational studies. Grade D: panel consensus.
Combining medications of different classes seems a con- venient way of delivering treatment and obtaining better results. This includes better lung function and improved symptoms [43–45].
Data from trials combining long-acting inhaled b-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids show a  significant  additional effect on pulmonary function and a reduction in symptoms in those receiving combination therapy compared with its components [45]. The largest effects in terms of exacerbations and health status are seen in patients with an FEV1 v50% pred, where combining treatment is clearly better than either component drug used alone.
Supplemental long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT) improves survival, exercise, sleep and cognitive performance in hypox- aemic patients [1–3, 45–50]. Reversal of hypoxaemia supersedes concerns about carbon dioxide (CO2) retention.
Arterial blood gas (ABG) assessment is the preferred method to determine oxygen need because it includes acid- base information. Arterial oxygen saturation as measured by pulse oximetry (Sp,O2) is adequate for trending. Physiological indications for oxygen include a arterial oxygen tension (Pa,O2) v7.3 kPa (55 mmHg). The therapeutic goal is to maintain Sp,O2 90% during rest, sleep and exertion. If oxygen is prescribed during an exacerbation, ABG should be rechecked in 30–90 days. Withdrawal of oxygen because of improved Pa,O2 in patients whose need for oxygen was determined when in a stable state may be detrimental.
Active patients require portable oxygen. Oxygen sources include gas, liquid and concentrator; while oxygen delivery methods include nasal continuous flow, pulse demand, reservoir cannulae and transtracheal catheters [51]. Patient education improves compliance.
Pulmonary rehabilitation is defined as "a multidisciplinary programme of care for patients with chronic respiratory impairment that is individually tailored and designed to optimise physical and social performance and autonomy" [52].
Pulmonary rehabilitation results in improvements in multiple outcome areas of considerable importance to the patient, including dyspnoea, exercise ability, health status and healthcare utilisation [53–57]. These positive effects occur despite the fact that it has a minimal effect on pulmonary function measurements. This reflects the fact that much of the morbidity from COPD results from secondary conditions, which are often treatable if recognised. Examples of these treatable conditions are cardiac deconditioning, peripheral muscle dysfunction, and a reduction in total and lean body mass, anxiety and poor coping skills. Elements of comprehensive pulmonary rehabilitation, including promoting a healthy lifestyle, stressing adherence to therapy and encouraging physical activity, should be incorporated into the care of all patients with COPD. Pulmonary rehabilitation is a multidisciplinary programme of care that is individually tailored and designed to optimise physical and social performance, and autonomy.
Pulmonary rehabilitation should be considered for patients with COPD who have dyspnoea or other respiratory symptoms, reduced exercise tolerance, a restriction in activities because of their disease, or impaired health status. There are no specific pulmonary function inclusion criteria that indicate the  need  for  pulmonary  rehabilitation,   since   symptoms and functional limitations direct the need for pulmonary rehabilitation.
The pulmonary rehabilitation programme includes exercise training, education, psychosocial/behavioural intervention, nutritional therapy, outcome assessment and promotion of long-term adherence to the rehabilitation recommendations.
Weight loss, as well as a depletion of fat-free mass (FFM), may be observed in stable COPD patients, irrespective of the degree of airflow limitation, and being underweight is associated with an increased mortality risk [58].
Nutritional screening is recommended in the assessment of COPD. Simple screening can be based on measurements of BMI and weight change. Patients are considered under- weight  (BMI v21  kg?m-2;  age w50  yrs),  normal  weight  (BMI 21–25 kg?m-2), overweight (BMI 25–30 kg?m-2) or obese (BMI  o30  kg?m-2).  Criteria  to  define  weight  loss  are  weight loss w10% in the past 6 months or w5% in the past month.
Weight loss and particularly muscle wasting contribute significantly to morbidity, disability and handicap in COPD patients. Weight loss and loss in fat mass is primarily the result of a negative balance between dietary intake and energy expenditure, while muscle wasting is a consequence of an impaired balance between protein synthesis and protein break- down. In advanced stages of COPD, both energy balance and protein balance are disturbed. Therefore, nutritional therapy may only be effective if combined with exercise or other anabolic stimuli [59, 60].
Patients with a diagnosis of COPD have a 2.7–4.7-fold increased risk of postoperative pulmonary complications [61–63]. However, COPD is not an absolute contraindication to any surgery. The most important concept determining the risk of surgery is that the further the procedure from the diaphragm, the lower the pulmonary complication rate. Although the value of pre-operative pulmonary function testing in general surgery is debatable, pre-operative pulmo- nary function studies have a well-documented role in the evaluation of patients undergoing lung surgery [64–67].
Smoking cessation at least 4–8 weeks pre-operatively and optimisation of lung function can decrease post-operative complications. In addition, early mobilisation, deep  breath- ing, intermittent positive-pressure breathing, incentive spiro- metry and effective analgesia may decrease post-operative complications.
Bullectomy, lung volume reduction surgery and lung transplantation may result in improved spirometry, lung volumes,  exercise capacity, dyspnoea,  health-related quality of life and possibly survival in highly selected patients [68–69]. Factors associated with a favourable or unfavourable outcome in bullectomy are shown in table 6.
The recently  completed  National  Emphysema  Therapy Trial (NETT) showed benefits for a  subset  of  patients with nonhomogenous emphysema. Figure 4 summarises the stratification of the patients and the results of the trial for each of the groups. Group B is comprised of those patients with nonhomogenous emphysema of upper lobe predomi- nance and limited exercise performance after pre-operative comprehensive rehabilitation. Group C corresponds to patients with predominant upper lobe emphysema and good post-rehabilitation exercise capacity. Group D corresponds to those patients with homogenous emphysema and low post-rehabilitation exercise capacity. Group E was characterised by homogeneous emphysema and good post-rehabilitation exercise capacity. Finally, group A corresponds to those patients with a very high risk for lung reduction surgery [70].
The results of this trial showed that patients in group B who underwent surgery had a lower mortality, better exercise capacity and health status than patients randomised to medical therapy. The operated patients in groups C and D did not benefit from improved survival but had significant improvements in exercise capacity and health status com- pared to patients randomised to medical therapy. The patients in group E had higher mortality and would, therefore, not be candidates for LVRS. The results in this group are similar to those observed in the highest risk group (A) who should not be considered for surgery.
Lung transplantation results in improved pulmonary function, exercise capacity and quality of life, however, its effects on survival remain controversial [71]. Specific guide- lines for lung transplantation in COPD are shown in table 7.
Sleep in COPD is associated with  oxygen  desaturation, which is predominantly due to the disease itself rather than to sleep apnoea [72]. The desaturation during sleep may be greater than during maximum exercise [73]. In COPD, sleep quality is markedly impaired, both subjectively and  objec- tively [74]. However, sleep apnoea syndrome is about as prevalent in COPD as in a general population of similar  age, but oxygen desaturation during sleep is more pronounced when the two conditions co-exist [75].
The clinical assessment in all patients with COPD should include questions about sleep quality and possible co-existing sleep apnoea syndrome. Sleep studies are not indicated in COPD except in special circumstances. These include: a clinical suspicion of sleep apnoea or complications  of  hypoxaemia that are not explained by the awake arterial oxygen levels, and pulmonary hypertension out of proportion to the severity of pulmonary function derangement.
Management of sleep problems in COPD should  particularly focus on minimising sleep disturbance by measures to limit cough and dyspnoea, and nocturnal oxygen therapy may be indicated for nocturnal hypoxaemia [76]. Hypnotics should be avoided, if possible, in patients with severe COPD.
Commercial airliners can cruise at w12,192 m (w40,000 feet), as long as the cabin is pressurised from 1,829–2,438 m (6,000–8,000 feet). This is equivalent to an inspired oxygen concentration at sea level of y15% [77].
Patients with COPD can exhibit falls in Pa,O2 that average 3.3 kPa (25 mmHg) [78]. Pre-flight assessment can help determine oxygen needs and the presence of co-morbidities [79]. Oxygen needs can be estimated by using the hypoxia inhalation test or through the use of regression formulae. However, it is currently recommended that the Pa,O2 during air travel should be maintained  above  6.7 kPa  (50 mmHg) [80]. Treatment with 2–3 L?min-1 of oxygen by nasal cannula will replace the  inspired  oxygen  partial  pressure  lost  at 2,438 m (8,000 feet) compared to sea level [81]. For high-risk patients, the goal should be to maintain oxygen pressure during flight at the same level at which the patient is clinically stable at sea level. Most airlines will provide supplemental oxygen on request.
An exacerbation of COPD is an event in the natural course of the disease characterised by a change in the patients.
EV1  f25% pred (without reversibility)  and/or Resting room air Pa,CO2 w7.3 kPa (55 mmHg) and/or
Elevated Pa,CO2 with progressive deterioration requiring long-term oxygen therapy
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second; Pa,CO2: arterial carbon dioxide tension.
Elevated pulmonary arterial pressure with progressive deterioration baseline dyspnoea, cough and/or sputum beyond day-to-day variability sufficient to warrant a change in management.
There is no agreed classification of exacerbations. The following operational classification of severity can help rank the clinical relevance of the episode and its outcome. Level I: treated at home. Level II: requires hospitalisation. Level III: leads to respiratory failure.
Several clinical elements must be considered when evaluat- ing patients with exacerbations. These include the severity of the underlying COPD, the presence of co-morbidity and the history of previous exacerbations. The physical examination should evaluate the effect of the episode on the haemodynamic and respiratory systems. The diagnostic procedures to be performed depend on the setting of the evaluation [82, 83]. The pharmacological treatment of patients with an exacer- bation of COPD is based on the same medications utilised in the management of the stable patient [1–3]. However, the evidence supports the use of systemic glucocorticosteroids
[84–88].
Table 8 shows the elements of the clinical evaluation and diagnostic procedures that are usually informative in patients with exacerbations according to the severity of the episode.
Table 9 provides reasonable guidelines for patient hospitalisation. Based on expert consensus, they consider the severity of the underlying respiratory dysfunction, progression of symptoms, response to outpatient therapy, existence of co- morbid conditions and the availability of adequate home care.
The severity of respiratory dysfunction dictates the need for admission to an intensive care unit (ICU). Depending on the resources available within an  institution,  admission  of patients with severe exacerbations of COPD to intermediate or special respiratory care units may be appropriate if personnel, skills and equipment exist to identify and manage
acute respiratory failure successfully.
Indications for ICU or special care unit admission include the following: impending or actual respiratory failure; pre- sence of other end-organ dysfunction, i.e. shock, renal, liver or neurological disturbance; and/or haemodynamic instability.
The treatment of exacerbations has to be based on the clinical presentation of the patient, as shown in tables 10, 11 and 12.
During a severe exacerbation, ABGs should be monitored for Pa,O2, arterial carbon dioxide tension (Pa,CO2) and pH. The Sp,O2 should be monitored for trending and adjusting oxygen settings. The goal of inpatient oxygen therapy is to maintain Pa,O2w8 kPa (60 mmHg) or Sp,O2w90% in order to prevent tissue hypoxia and preserve cellular oxygenation. Due to the shape of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve, increa- sing the Pa,O2 to values much greater than 8 kPa (60 mmHg) confers little added benefit (1–2 vol %) and may increase the risk of CO2 retention, which may lead to respiratory acidosis. The main delivery devices include nasal cannula and venturi masks. Alternative delivery devices include nonre- breather masks, reservoir cannulae, nasal cannulae or transtra- cheal catheters.
As a general principle, prevention of tissue hypoxia supercedes CO2 retention concerns. If CO2 retention occurs, monitor for acidemia. If acidemia occurs, consider noninva- sive or invasive mechanical ventilation.
Patients may be started on oxygen for the first time during hospitalisation for an acute exacerbation and discharged before recovery is complete. Patients with hypoxaemia at discharge may require short-term oxygen therapy as the effects of the exacerbation are clearing. After 30–90 days, oxygen may no longer be required; thus re-evaluation of the patients oxygen and medical status should be completed. If the patient no longer meets the prescribing criteria for LTOT, oxygen should be discontinued, as there is no proven survival benefit for patients with mild hypoxaemia [91]. Patients recovering from an exacerbation may benefit from pulmonary rehabilitation. Some patients who needed oxygen prior to hospitalisation may, over time, increase their Pa,O2 to the point that they no longer qualify for oxygen. This phenomenon is thought to be due to a reparative effect of LTOT. Withdrawing oxygen from these patients may negate the reparative effect and cause the patient9s status to deteriorate to the point of meeting the physiological requirement for oxygen. Consequently, these patients should continue their oxygen therapy without inter- ruption, as withdrawing their oxygen might be detrimental
[92, 93]. 
Mechanical ventilation can be administered via noninvasive or invasive ventilation. Noninvasive is preferred whenever possible. Mechanical ventilation, either "invasive" or "non- invasive", is not a therapy but it is a form of life support until the cause underlying the acute respiratory failure is reversed with medical therapy [94–96]. Patients considered for mechan- ical ventilation should have a measurement of ABGs. 
The institution of mechanical ventilation should be consi- dered when, despite optimal medical therapy and oxygen administration there is acidosis (pHv7.35) and hypercapnia (Pa,CO2 w6–8 kPa (45–60 mmHg)) and respiratory frequency w24 breaths?min-1.
Mechanical ventilation can be delivered as follows. 1) Through an endotracheal tube, by passing the upper airway,
i.e. "conventional" or "invasive" mechanical ventilation. 2) Without the use of an endotracheal tube, i.e. "noninvasive" mechanical ventilation or NIMV, which can be  instituted  in two modes: noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) (nasal or face masks); or negative pressure ventilation (e.g. iron lung, not recommended).
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. NPPV is by far the most popular mode of providing noninvasive ventilation. It is typically administered as a combination of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) plus pressure support ventilation (PSV) [94–98]. ABG improve because of an increase in alveolar ventilation without significant modifications in the alveolar ventilation/perfusion mismatching and gas exchange in the lungs [99].
ABGs are fundamental for the correct assessment and guidance of therapy. Once baseline ABGs are obtained, if the pH is v7.35 in the presence of hypercapnia, NPPV should be delivered in a controlled environment such as intermediate ICUs and/or high-dependency units. If the pH isv7.25, NPPV should be administered in the ICU and intubation should be readily available. The combination of some CPAP  (e.g. 4–8 cmH2O) and PSV (e.g. 10–15 cmH2O) provides the most effective mode of NPPV.
Patients meeting exclusion criteria should be considered for immediate intubation and ICU admission. In the first hours, NPPV requires the same level of supervision as conventional mechanical ventilation.
Contraindications for NPPV include the following: respira- tory arrest; cardiovascular instability (hypotension, arrhyth- mias, myocardial infarction); impaired mental status, somnolence, inability to cooperate; copious and/or viscous secretions with high aspiration risk; recent facial or gastro- oesophageal surgery; craniofacial trauma and/or fixed naso- pharyngeal abnormality; burns; and extreme obesity.
NPPV can be considered successful when ABGs and pH improve, dyspnoea is relieved, the acute episode resolves without the need of endotracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation can be discontinued and the patient is discharged from the hospital.
One-year mortality was reported to be lower in patients receiving NPPV for exacerbations of COPD, as compared to both conventional mechanical ventilation [100] and optimal medical therapy alone [101].
Figure 6 illustrates a useful  flow-chart for the  use of NPPV in exacerbation of COPD complicated by acute respiratory failure.
Invasive ventilation. Intubation should be considered in patients with the following. 1) NPPV failure: worsening of ABGs and or pH in 1–2 h; lack of improvement in ABGs and or pH after 4 h. 2) Severe acidosis (pHv7.25) and hypercapnia (Pa,CO2 w8 kPa (60 mmHg)). 3) Life-threatening hypoxaemia (arterial oxygen tension/inspiratory oxygen fractionv26.6  kPa (200 mmHg)). 4) Tachypnoea w35 breaths?min-1.
As a general rule, patients hospitalised for an acute exacerbation can be considered for discharge once the reasons for admission are controlled and/or reversed. Based on consensus, conditions that need to be met when considering patients for discharge include: symptoms returning to base- line, including eating, sleeping, etc.; haemodynamic stability; oxygenation returning to baseline; inhaled b-agonist therapy required less frequently; ability to resume ambulation; ability to eat and sleep without frequent awakening by dyspnoea; off-parenteral therapy for 12–24 h; patient (or home care- giver) understands correct use of medications; follow-up and homecare arrangements have been completed (e.g. visiting nurse, oxygen delivery, meal provisions etc.). 
Once discharged, the patient should be followed. There are no studies that have addressed the specific schedules more likely to result in a positive outcome, but patients with frequent exacerbations are more likely to relapse. Likewise, patients who have developed respiratory failure requiring admission to an ICU carry a very high mortality risk. Based on this, the guidelines for the re-evaluation of patients admitted for exacerbation of COPD should include: reassess- ment within 4 weeks; evaluation of improvement in symptoms and physical exam; assessment of need for supplemental oxygen; repeat examination if previous abnormalities were present; assessment of ability of the patient to cope with the environment; an understanding and re-adjustment of the treatment regimen.
Patients with COPD experience acute exacerbations of their disease, which may produce respiratory failure and a possible need for either ventilatory support or accepting death. No clinical features can identify patients with respiratory failure who will experience more burden than benefit from life sup- portive care.
If the patient has, or can have, clear preferences about treatment, respect for the patient requires that care providers give effect to the patient9s views. Autonomy of the patient is the predominant ethical principle that drives end-of-life decision-making in many societies.
All healthcare providers should assist patients during stable periods of health to think about their advance care planning by initiating discussions about end-of-life care. These discus- sions should prepare patients with advanced COPD for a life-threatening exacerbation of their chronic disease, while assisting them to go on living and enjoying life. Pulmonary rehabilitation provides an important opportunity to assist advance care planning for patients with moderate-to-severe COPD. Educational programmes on advance care planning within pulmonary rehabilitation increase the adoption rate for instruments of advance care planning and patient-physician discussion about end-of-life care [102]. Patients who choose to refuse life supportive care or have it withdrawn require expert delivery of palliative care.
Patients with COPD sometimes qualify for formal hospice services, especially when they are having repeated exacerba- tions and very poor measures on tests of pulmonary function. Nevertheless, many patients will have a fatal exacerbation within a short time of having fairly good function, so one cannot wait to consider using hospice until death is nearly certain. Opportunities for hospice care are frequently neglected for patients coming to the end of life with COPD. Neglect in offering patients and their families appropriate resources for supportive end-of-life care results in unnecessary admissions to acute care hospitals for worsening respiratory symptoms.
Disease management can be regarded as an integrated and systematic approach in which healthcare providers work together in a coordinated and cooperative manner to produce an optimal outcome for a particular patient with COPD, throughout the entire continuum of care [105]. The concept of the disease as a continuum is depicted in figure 7. This figure also represents the navigation tool for the web-based Standards for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Patients with COPD document 2004.
Integrated care for COPD involves the patient and a team of clinical professionals working in primary care, cooperating with secondary care and rehabilitation services. Optimal disease management involves redesigning standard medical care to integrate rehabilitative elements into a system of patient self-management and promotion of a healthy lifestyle. The following aspects are  important:  smoking  cessation  for all patients who smoke; early diagnosis and secondary prevention (healthy lifestyle, vaccinations, exercise); education and self-management; pulmonary rehabilitation; mon- itoring and early recognition of exacerbation; implementation of rapid action plan; careful attention to  end-of-life issues; palliative care. 
Referral to specialist care is indicated for COPD patients with  the  following:  disease  onset  at  age  v40 yrs;  frequent exacerbations (two or more per year) despite adequate treatment; rapidly progressive course of disease (decline in FEV1, progressive dyspnoea, decreased exercise tolerance, unintentional  weight  loss;  severe  COPD  (FEV1v50%  pred) despite optimal treatment; need for LTOT; onset of co- morbid illness (osteoporosis, heart failure, bronchiectasis, lung cancer); evaluation for surgery.
